---
layout: post
title: "Tibbles"
date: 2017-12-11
author: Richard
categories: r
published: true
---
I have to work with Excel files a lot, and converting them to `csv` is a pain, so I was recently looking for ways to import `.xlsx` files into R. After some searching, I found the excellent [realXL](http://readxl.tidyverse.org/) package. It worked perfectly except for one small but horrifying thing; the data is imported as a "tibble" rather than a data frame.

I'm not quite sure why, but the thought of dealing with tibbles was not pleasant to me. I immediately tried to convert it to a data frame by using the function `as.data.frame` which, remarkably, worked. I think this may be the first time that I have been able to guess the name of an R function without looking it up in the documentation!

Impressed that the inventor of tibbles had been thoughtful enough to come up with a naming convention which is consistent with the rest of R, I decided to take a closer look, and discovered that the documentation on tibbles is rather [excellent](http://tibble.tidyverse.org/). It turns out that a tibble *is* a data frame, but it just has some annoying behaviours removed.

For example, if you try to create a data frame like this:

```r
X1 <- data.frame(x=1:3, y=c("A", "B", "C"))
X1
  x y
1 1 A
2 2 B
3 3 C
```

it looks harmless enough, but it is unpleasantly surprising to discover that `y` is actually a factor, and will be treated by R as numeric under certain circumstances. This can really mess up calculations, and it is important when creating a data frame or importing data from a csv file to specify `stringsAsFactors = F`, unless you really want a factor variable.

```r
X2 <- data.frame(x=1:3, y=c("A", "B", "C"), stringsAsFactors=F)
X2
  x y
1 1 A
2 2 B
3 3 C
```

The main thing which tibbles do is: not this. They also have a slightly nicer `print` method than the default for data frames.

```r
library(tibble)
X3 <- tibble(x=1:3, y=c("A", "B", "C"))
X3
# A tibble: 3 x 2
      x     y
  <int> <chr>
1     1     A
2     2     B
3     3     C
```

I can see that tibbles would be a pleasant replacement for data frames in a future version of R, or a successor language. However, I do not like the name. The only similar word I have come across is "Tib", which is the name of the ace of trumps in the old English card game of [Gleek](http://www.parlettgames.uk/histocs/gleek.html). 
