---
layout: post
title: "Cat or Dog? Classifying pets by name"
subtitle: "Naive Bayes versus Deep Learning"
header-img: "blog/images/2020-03/godcat.png"
date: 2020-03-29
author: Richard
categories: deep-learning nlp predictive-models python
published: true
---
Classifying images into cats and dogs is a very popular application of deep learning, but what about their names? Can you tell from the name of a pet whether it is a cat or a dog? To some extent, yes. For example, a pet named "Mr. Tiddles" or "Garfield" is very likely to be a cat, whereas "Rex", "Rover" or "Fido" is probably a dog.

To what extent are cat and dog names different? It it possible to determine whether a pet is a cat or dog from the name alone? How accurately? Are there some telltale signs which make some names cattier or doggier than others?

I happen to have a classifier for a similar problem lying around that I want to share because it was so successful. However, I cannot give details of the original application since it came from a commerical setting. This led me to the cat and dog problem.

## Step 1: Thought Experiment

I like to get started on a problem like this by thinking about how a human would approach it. How do I know, upon hearing a name like Garfield, whether it belongs to a dog or a cat? The obvious answer is: I know it is probably a cat because I have encountered a cat of that name before. 

I guess that the vast majority of cases fall into this category. So, all I need is a database of names of cats and dogs, and I can look up the name of an unseen pet in the database and decide whether it is a cat or dog by counting how many of each type of pet had that name.

This simple look-up approach can be implemented as a naive Bayes classifier, which is a standard kind of classifier. It has the advantage of being extremely simple. 

One obvious disadvantage of this approach is how to cope with a name which is not in the database? This problem will presumably go away if you have enough data (if you have the name of every pet in the world, for example) but it is nevertheless true that many people like to give their pets unique and unusual names which have to be dealt with.

A second possible approach is the linguistic approach. Here, you would analyse the name and extract features. For example, I imagine that names beginning with R are more likely to be associated with dogs, because they have a growling quality. This sort of thing cannot possibly be detected by looking names up in a list. However, nowadays it is quite straightforward to build NLP (natural language processing) models to approach problems like this, using tools which have been developed within the last decade or so.

## Step 2: Gather Data

Searching for pet name data gives a lot of top ten lists, but not many lists of all pets in a given location. The key search term here is <i>open data</i>. Seattle has made a collection of pet licenses available via its open data portal [here](https://data.seattle.gov/Community/Seattle-Pet-Licenses/jguv-t9rb). I didn't feel like one city would be enough, so I also got some open data from Toronto [here](https://open.toronto.ca/dataset/licensed-dog-and-cat-names/).

Some processing is required because the Toronto data is a frequency list rather than individual pets. Also, it seems that pets in Toronto are registered each year, since some rare names re-occur on a regular basis. For this reason, I only took the most recent occurence of each name in the Toronto data set.

Finally, I combined the data sets and uploaded the data in a single csv file [here](https://github.com/rtrvale/datasets/). Unfortunately, the data set is too large to preview, but we'll see what it looks like in a minute.

## Step 3: Modelling

I imported the data using Pandas. I chose to prepare a modelling dataset using only the Seattle data.

```python
pets = pd.read_csv("https://raw.githubusercontent.com/rtrvale/datasets/master/pets_seattle_toronto.csv")
pets.head()
	Unnamed: 0	name	species	year	city	count
0	0	NaN	dog	2000	Seattle	1.0
1	1	FANCY	dog	2000	Seattle	1.0
2	2	SKIP	dog	2000	Seattle	1.0
3	3	KANGA	dog	2000	Seattle	1.0
4	4	OSCAR	dog	2000	Seattle	1.0

seattle_species = seattle_species[pd.notna(seattle_names)]
seattle_names = seattle_names[pd.notna(seattle_names)]

seattle_species = seattle_species.reset_index()['species']
seattle_names = seattle_names.reset_index()['name']
```


## Step 4: Implementation

{::nomarkdown}
<center><h1>Cat or Dog?</h1></center>
<center>Type your pet's name in the box, and the AI will calculate whether it is more likely to be a cat or a dog!</center>
<div style="display:flex; flex-direction:row; justify-content:center; align-items:center;
height: 300px;">
    <div id="dogPicture" style="
								  width : 300px;
								  height: 300px;
								  margin-right:25px;
								  margin-bottom:20px;
								  margin-top:20px;
								  transition: width 1s ease-in-out;
								  transition: height 1s ease-in-out;
">

<svg viewBox = "0 0 100 100" preserveAspectRatio="xMinYMin meet" width="300" height="300" id="dog">
  <rect x="15" y="15%" rx="20" ry="20" width="70%" height="70%"
  style="fill:brown;" />
  <rect x="10" y="25" rx="1" ry="5" width="20%" height="70%"
  style="fill:black;" />
  <rect x="70" y="25" rx="1" ry="5" width="20%" height="70%"
  style="fill:black;" />
  <rect x="35" y="30" rx="1" ry="1" width="10%" height="10%"
  style="fill:white;" />
  <rect x="55" y="30" rx="1" ry="1" width="10%" height="10%"
  style="fill:white;" />
  <rect x="40" y="45" rx="10" ry="10" width="20%" height="20%"
  style="fill:black;" />
</svg>
</div>
    <div id="catPicture" style=" 
								  width : 300px;
								  height: 300px;
								  margin-left: 25px;
								  margin-bottom:20px;
								  margin-top: 20px;
								  transition: width 1s ease-in-out; 
								  transition: height 1s ease-in-out;
								  ">
	<svg viewBox = "0 0 100 100" preserveAspectRatio="xMinYMin meet" width="300" height="300" id="cat">
  <rect x="15" y="15%" rx="35" ry="35" width="70%" height="70%"
  style="fill:grey;" />
  <rect x="15" y="5" rx="1" ry="5" width="10%" height="30%"
  style="fill:grey;" />
  <rect x="75" y="5" rx="1" ry="5" width="10%" height="30%"
  style="fill:grey;" />
  <rect x="35" y="30" rx="5" ry="5" width="10%" height="10%"
  style="fill:white;" />
  <rect x="55" y="30" rx="5" ry="5" width="10%" height="10%"
  style="fill:white;" />
  <rect x="40" y="45" rx="10" ry="10" width="20%" height="20%"
  style="fill:black;" />
  <line x1="50" y1="55" x2="10" y2="45" style="stroke:rgb(0,0,0);stroke-width:1" />
  <line x1="50" y1="55" x2="10" y2="55" style="stroke:rgb(0,0,0);stroke-width:1" />
  <line x1="50" y1="55" x2="10" y2="65" style="stroke:rgb(0,0,0);stroke-width:1" />
  <line x1="50" y1="55" x2="90" y2="45" style="stroke:rgb(0,0,0);stroke-width:1" />
  <line x1="50" y1="55" x2="90" y2="55" style="stroke:rgb(0,0,0);stroke-width:1" />
  <line x1="50" y1="55" x2="90" y2="65" style="stroke:rgb(0,0,0);stroke-width:1" />
</svg>							  
    </div>
</div>
<center><input type="text" id="form">
<button onclick="process();">get</button></center>
<center><div id="result" style="margin-top:10px;"></div></center>

<script type="text/javascript">
/*! fast-levenshtein 2016-12-27. Copyright Ramesh Nair <ram@hiddentao.com> (http://www.hiddentao.com/) 
(MIT License)
Copyright (c) 2013 Ramesh Nair
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:
The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.
*/
!function(){"use strict";var a;try{a="undefined"!=typeof Intl&&"undefined"!=typeof Intl.Collator?Intl.Collator("generic",{sensitivity:"base"}):null}catch(b){console.log("Collator could not be initialized and wouldn't be used")}var c=[],d=[],e={get:function(b,e,f){var g=f&&a&&f.useCollator,h=b.length,i=e.length;if(0===h)return i;if(0===i)return h;var j,k,l,m,n;for(l=0;i>l;++l)c[l]=l,d[l]=e.charCodeAt(l);c[i]=i;var o;if(g)for(l=0;h>l;++l){for(k=l+1,m=0;i>m;++m)j=k,o=0===a.compare(b.charAt(l),String.fromCharCode(d[m])),k=c[m]+(o?0:1),n=j+1,k>n&&(k=n),n=c[m+1]+1,k>n&&(k=n),c[m]=j;c[m]=k}else for(l=0;h>l;++l){for(k=l+1,m=0;i>m;++m)j=k,o=b.charCodeAt(l)===d[m],k=c[m]+(o?0:1),n=j+1,k>n&&(k=n),n=c[m+1]+1,k>n&&(k=n),c[m]=j;c[m]=k}return k}};"undefined"!=typeof define&&null!==define&&define.amd?define(function(){return e}):"undefined"!=typeof module&&null!==module&&"undefined"!=typeof exports&&module.exports===exports?module.exports=e:"undefined"!=typeof self&&"function"==typeof self.postMessage&&"function"==typeof self.importScripts?self.Levenshtein=e:"undefined"!=typeof window&&null!==window&&(window.Levenshtein=e)}();
</script>
<script src="/blog/scripts/2020-03/tokens.js"></script>
<script src="/blog/scripts/2020-03/cat.js"></script>
<script src="/blog/scripts/2020-03/dog.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript">
	var getPet = function(name, laplace=1){

	/* split the name into individual words */
	var words = name.split(" ");
	// perhaps no need to remove punctuation
	for (var i=0; i < words.length; i++){
		words[i] = words[i].trim().toUpperCase();
	}
	// words can still contain instances of "", the empty string
	
	/* for each word, count the number of cats and dogs */
	var probCat = 1;
	var probDog = 1;
	
	for (var i=0; i < words.length; i++){
		var word = words[i];
		var cats=0;
		var dogs=0;
		
		if (word != ""){
			// go through the list of tokens
			var minDistance = Levenshtein.get(word, tokens[0]);
			cats = 0;
			dogs = 0;
			var distance;
			
			for (var j=0; j < tokens.length; j++){
				distance = Levenshtein.get(word, tokens[j]);
				if (distance < minDistance){
					minDistance = distance;
					cats = cat[j];
					dogs = dog[j];
				} else if (distance === minDistance){
					cats += cat[j];
					dogs += dog[j];
				}
				if (distance === 0){
					// in this case there is an exact match so we are finished
					break;
				}
			}
		}
		probCat *= (cats + laplace)/(cat.length + laplace);
		probDog *= (dogs + laplace)/(dog.length + laplace);
	}
	
	/* multiply the probabilities as if they were independent */
	return probCat/(probCat + probDog);
}

var process = function(){
	var name = document.getElementById("form").value;
	var probCat = getPet(name);
	var output = name + " is ";
	if (probCat < 0.55 && probCat > 0.45){
		output += "possibly a ";
	} else if (probCat < 0.7 && probCat > 0.3){
		output += "probably a ";
	} else {
		output += "likely a ";
	}
	if (probCat > 0.5){
		output += "cat (";
	} else {
		output += "dog (";
	}
	output += Math.floor(probCat > 0.5 ? probCat*100 : (1-probCat)*100) + "%)";
	document.getElementById("dogPicture").style.width = 300*(1-probCat);
	document.getElementById("dog").width.baseVal.value = 300*(1-probCat);
	document.getElementById("catPicture").style.width = 300*(probCat);
	document.getElementById("cat").width.baseVal.value = 300*(probCat);
	document.getElementById("dogPicture").style.height = 300*(1-probCat);
	document.getElementById("dog").height.baseVal.value = 300*(1-probCat);
	document.getElementById("catPicture").style.height = 300*(probCat);
	document.getElementById("cat").height.baseVal.value = 300*(probCat);
	document.getElementById("result").innerHTML = "Computing...";
	setTimeout(function(){document.getElementById("result").innerHTML = output;}, 1000*Math.random());
	//document.getElementById("result").innerHTML = output;
}

document.onkeypress = function enter(e) {if (e.which == 13) { process(); }}
</script>
{:/}
