---
layout: post
title: "Gladiator Simulator, Part 2"
subtitle: ""
header-img: ""
date: 2020-04-30
author: Richard
categories: mathematics probability
published: true
---

This is a follow-up to the previous post, in which I was interested in simulating a fight between two groups of gladiators, each of whom does a random amount of damage to the other group at each time step.

This resulted in the following model with $a_0, b_0 > 0$ and $\mathrm{Bin}(N, \pi)$ being a binomial random variable.

$$\begin{align*}
a_{n+1} = \mathrm{max}(0, a_n - \mathrm{Bin}(b_n, q))\\
b_{n+1} = \mathrm{max}(0, b_n - \mathrm{Bin}(a_n, p))
\end{align*}$$

I am interested in which side is more likely to win, what the winning probability is, and how many survivors there will be on the winning side.

It is easy enough to simulate, but I am particularly looking for an analytic solution.

### Lanchester's Law

I mentioned previously that the model may be connected to Lanchester's Law, a law about fighting which states that the quantity

$$pa_n^2 - qb_n^2$$

should be a constant. It is possible to get a partial solution to the gladiator model by using this idea.

The starting point is to consider

$$p a_{n+1}^2 - q b_{n+1}^2 = p(a_n - \mathrm{Bin}(b_n, q))^2 - q(b_n - \mathrm{Bin}(a_n, p))^2$$

and expand the right hand side, to get

$$pa_n^2 - 2pa_nY_n + pY_n^2 - qb_n^2 + 2qb_nX_n - qX_n^2$$

where $X_n \sim \mathrm{Bin}(a_n, p)$ and $Y_n \sim \mathrm{Bin}(b_n, q)$ are independent. The expected value of $pY_n^2 - qX_n^2$ is

$$E[pY_n^2 - qX_n^2] = pE[Y_n^2] - qE[X_n^2] \approx pq^2b_n^2 - qp^2a_n^2 = -pq(pa_n^2 - qb_n^2)$$

using that $a_n^2$ and $b_n^2$ are much bigger than $a_n$ and $b_n$ respectively. Therefore,

$$p a_{n+1}^2 - q b_{n+1}^2 \approx (1-pq)(pa_n^2 - qb_n^2) - 2pa_nY_n + 2qb_nX_n$$

plus another term with zero expected value (but positive variance). Neglecting this term and using the normal approximation to the binomial yields the approximation

$$p a_{n+1}^2 - q b_{n+1}^2 \approx (1-pq)(pa_n^2 - qb_n^2) + N(\mu_n, \sigma_n^2)$$

where $\mu_n = 2qb_nE[X_n] - 2pa_nE[Y_n] = 0$ and $\sigma_n^2 = 4q^2b_n^2\mathrm{Var}(X_n) + 4p_n^2\mathrm{Var}(Y_n)$.

Writing $a=a_0$, $b=b_0$ and assuming that $pq$ is small enough that $(pq)^2 \approx pq$ and that $a_n$ is much less than $a_0$ and $b_n$ is much less than $b_0$, we get that at time $t$, when the battle ends,

$$pa_t^2 - qb_t^2 \sim N((1-pq)(pa^2 - qb^2), \sigma^2)$$

where

$$\sigma^2 = (1-pq)(4q^2b^2ap(1-p) + 4p^2a^2bq(1-q))$$

and note that at time $t$, by definition, we must have one of $a_t$, $b_t$ equal to zero. The probability of side $A$ winning is the probability that $X:= N((1-pq)(pa^2 - qb^2), \sigma^2)$ is positive, and the number of survivors $a_t$ satisfies $pa_t^2 \sim X$, conditional on $X > 0$.
